[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Andrew Harvey, I'm
very happy to meet you.
>> Me, to meet you.
>> You have a lot of people who
love you who are in my world
and in my path.
>> Thank you.
>> You come highly recommended,
so I love meeting you.
I want to start with a quote
that is so interesting to me.
Larry Dossey who wrote
"Healing Words," one
of my favorite authors, wrote
of your book, "The Son of Man,"
this book is a grenade
tossed into the complacencies
of Christianity.
It is a radical challenge to
revision the nature of Jesus
and the message he brought.
It requires courage
to read this book.
But great books
always involve risk.
What did he mean when he
said it requires courage
to read this book?
>> Well, I think, the vision of
Jesus that I'm trying to give
in the book is a
vision, fundamentally,
and totally different from
that, that the majority
of the Christian churches have
given people over the years.
What I'm trying to
do is to strip away
what I consider the rubbish
in the portrayal of Jesus
from the authentic historical
and mystical Jesus,
and to give the real path in its
real frightening, outrageous,
ecstatic splendor and challenge.
And that's why it takes
courage to face the real Jesus.
The real Jesus, in my
opinion, is not saying,
I am the son of god and you
are just these miserable worms,
who if you pray hard enough,
will one day experience
just a taste of your divinity.
The real Jesus is saying, as
the Buddha said to humanity,
I have realized the
power of divine love,
so can you, because
I know that you can.
I am not unique.
You have this power within
you, and when you realize it,
you will become like me, imbued
with the force and passion
and dynamism of the
spirit, and like me,
extremely radical in the way
in which you see the world.
Because the real Jesus,
as modern scholarship
is making clear and as a
real reading of the gospels
make clear, is someone who
was a mystic revolutionary.
And being a mystic revolutionary
was a revolutionary
in every single
aspect of the world.
He was an emotional
revolutionary,
a sexual revolutionary,
an economic and political
revolutionary.
And his great challenge
to the whole human race
was to bring together a vision
of divine beauty and divine
love, and a vision
of how that could
transfigure all the conditions
of real life on Earth.
And that's very scary.
>> Very scary.
>> Because it really
forces us to choose.
>> Let's go back to one
of the points of his being
a revolutionary that
people will really resist.
Did I hear you say he was
a sexual revolutionary?
>> Yes.
I don't mean that Jesus indulged
in bizarre sexual practices.
I mean that Jesus, for example,
deeply venerated women.
If you think of all the
great teachers of humanity,
they all have, of course,
compassion towards men,
particularly the male
teachers, but none of them
honored and venerated women
with the depth of tenderness
that Jesus did.
Jesus-- perhaps Jesus's
deepest disciple
we discovered from
the gnostic gospels
was not the ones that have
been traditionally associated
with him, but Mary Magdalene.
>> Yes, indeed.
>> And perhaps the woman
that he appeared to after his
Resurrection, the first person
to see him resurrected was
a woman.
He gave some of his
deepest teachings
to women, Phoenician
women in the gospel.
And he gave a very
profound teaching
about adultery and
about sexuality
to the woman taken in adultery.
So Jesus was saying in
all of these things,
I think, the
patriarchal denigration
of the feminine, the patriarchal
humiliation of women,
and of all the associate
virtues associated with women
is a disgrace and a tremendous
defeat of the spirit.
And that true divine love
embraces the masculine
and feminine.
And that is a very
revolutionary remark,
and a very
revolutionary position,
which we still
haven't incarnated.
Look at the way
women are treated.
Look at way the feminine is
still derided and humiliated.
>> Well look at the way so many
leaders of so many Christian
churches would not think
in terms of Jesus as having
a feminine energy as well
as a masculine energy.
>> This is madness.
Because if there is
anyone who has incarnated
the aspect of the motherhood of
God more intensely than Jesus,
I do not know him or her.
When I went to Israel, I
had an amazing experience.
I went to the place, [? Taka, ?]
where Jesus actually gave,
it said, the Sermon
on the Mount.
And I stood in that chapel
with the Latin Beatitudes
all around me and I sang the
Beatitudes in Latin to myself
and I gazed out at the landscape
that he had spoken to and from.
And at that moment, it
really did strike me
with a force of lightning, the
day before I had been in Sinai,
and Sinai is striated
and violent and very,
very vertical.
It's very much the place
where you would experience
God as total holiness.
The landscape that he
gave the Beatitudes in
is a landscape of tremendous
maternal sweetness,
of hills rolling down
to this blue sea.
>> Interesting.
>> And at that moment I
understood that the Beatitudes
themselves are celebrating
the feminine virtues.
What did they say?
Blessed are the meek.
Blessed are the tender.
Blessed is the gentle.
Blessed are those who nourish.
And if you read them
in the Aramaic, which
is what I've tried to
do and tried to explore,
then you realize just how
profoundly Jesus is celebrating
the feminine side of God,
the maternal side of God,
the tender side of God,
the sensitive side of God,
the nourishing side of God.
And the church has failed to
incarnate the Christ energy
because it has simply ignored
or humiliated this side.
It amounts to a crucifixion of
the real Christ consciousness.
And it is reason
why it has never
been really taken over
history as it was meant to do.
>> You're speaking of the
Beatitudes reminds me that--
let me see if I can
remember it correctly.
Your book begins with one of
the Beatitudes, I believe.
Only he who is pure
of heart will see God.
Isn't that a Beatitude
from Matthew?
>> Yes, it is.
>> Why did you begin with that?
>> Well, because it's
been my experience,
as it is of every mystic
of every tradition,
that there is a seed of God
consciousness in each of us
and if you purify the heart
by meditation and by prayer
and by serving others, slowly
you come to realize that God is
shining in the heart, the
divine is shining in the heart,
and the whole world is
shining in the divine light
of the heart.
And you can only do
that if you undergo
the necessary purifications.
You have to come to understand
the darkness of your full self.
You have to really
aspire to be one
with the beloved, the divine.
And you have to
really train yourself
to concentrate on the truths
of divine relationship.
If you do, if you attain
that purity of heart,
you will see God.
You won't just believe in God.
You won't just have
faith that God exists.
You will see God.
And for the last 10 years
through the grace of God,
I have been seeing God.
And I would wish every
single human being
to have that experience
because it's an experience that
changes totally what we know
of life [INTERPOSING VOICES]
as the feast.
>> What a gift.
What a marvelous opportunity
for you to be able to see God.
>> Well I think everybody can.
That's what I know.
And that's what Jesus knew.
That's what the Buddha knew.
That's what Roman
Christian knew.
That's what everybody
who sees God knows
is that everyone could see
God if they loved enough,
if they gave enough, if
they sacrificed enough,
if they prayed enough, if
they believed enough, if they
sacrificed their self enough.
It's not a unique gift.
There are many
people who see God--
many.
And the more I see
of God, the more
I realized that God is
blazing all around us.
We're just blind.
>> Well now I must say,
I can feel his presence.
I feel a presence--
>> Yes.
>> --of God around me at
times, not all the time.
But I can't say that
I've ever seen him.
What is it like?
Is it like an apparition or do
you see him in someone else?
>> You see him in everything
and as everything.
The world becomes
a place where God
is experienced as manifesting in
every flower, in every banana,
in every child, in every
eye-- your eyes now.
The whole experience
is one of the divine
in you savoring and
celebrating and honoring
the divine in everyone
else and everything
else so that it becomes--
it's impossible
to put into words.
The greatest mystical poets
have tried and failed.
But what Rumi said in one
of his late poems, I think,
is really powerful.
He says, "I see the waters of
magnificent streaming always,
and the whole of
heaven and earth
reveals itself as
the Resurrection,
as the place where the
divine is dancing."
And that is not poetry actually,
that is a living experience.
And I'm convinced that many,
many more people could have it
than think they could have it.
Because we've really
said, oh, there
are these great mystics who
have this extraordinary spirits,
but we're just poor human beings
crawling around in our lives.
And they have the experience,
and we get support
from their experience.
This is nonsense.
Everybody can have
this experience.
To have this experience
is why we are here.
We are the children
of the father mother.
We have the power within us.
What we need are the simple
techniques of meditation,
of concentration, the
right information,
and the right encouragement
and inspiration.
With all of those
things together,
it's amazing what you can see.
>> I wonder if you will take
a lot of heat, if you will,
for the father mother?
I like the sound
of it, personally.
But do you know some
people will resist that?
>> Well, I do not think
the words that you use are
so important.
But I think it's
extremely important
to bring in the feminine
in every discussion
about the divine.
The divine is both masculine
and feminine and beyond both.
The creation is
created by the play
of the masculine and
feminine energies.
The greatest mystical
systems have known this.
We have in Taoism,
the yin and the yang,
which engender the
whole universe.
We have in Hinduism,
Shiva and Shakti.
And we have, I believe, at
the heart of Christianity,
this tremendous love play
between the divine mother
and her child and the
forces of the feminine
and of the masculine.
This is-- it's crazy not to
think of God as androgynous.
It is simply idiotic,
because it excludes
a whole power of feminine love,
of feminine understanding.
A great Hindu mystic,
I think, put it best.
He said, [? Kabir, ?] my father
is the transcendent absolute,
and my mother is the
embodied godhead.
And they are continually
making love to each other,
and they are continually
engendering the creation.
And you can't have
the full experience
until you meet your father
the transcendent and you adore
and love your mother
the embodied creation.
That is the full experience.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Do you think it will be
challenging for you to make
Christ consciousness available
to people who have different
perspectives on it--
Muslims, Jews, Hindus-- that
kind of Christ consciousness?
>> Well, you know, I have done
a lot of work in all of the main
mystical traditions.
I've written 30 books.
>> I know.
>> I've been initiated in
most of the major mystical
traditions.
I've written a Hindu book.
I've written-- co-wrote
the "Tibetan Book of Living
and Dying," for [INAUDIBLE]
I've done a great deal of work
on Rumi and the Sufi tradition.
And what I have found
is that this experience
of divine love that is
at the core of the Christ
consciousness is at the core of
all authentic mystic awakening.
We call it the
Christ consciousness,
but Ramakrishnan, a great
Hindu experienced it.
Rumi, a great Sufi,
experienced it.
Let's get rid of the names.
Let's have people
have the experience.
>> Practical advice.
>> The real experience.
So then they will understand.
For example, the mother
is cooking a white fish,
and she has six
children, and she
knows that each of
the six children
eat the fish in a different
way, so she cooks it
in a different way.
Different cuisines, same fish--
that is the whole nature of the
various religions of the world.
When they claim to be the only
truth, they're simply lying.
It's idiotic.
When they claim to have
a part of the truth,
they're telling the truth.
But let's see--
let's eat the fish
and not worry too much
about the cuisine.
And let us know that
everybody eating the fish
is eating a part of the fish.
And also, let's
know something else
that we will never
eat the whole fish.
We will never understand it all.
Let's have the
experience and then
other things will
become very clear.
>> What do you mean when you say
Jesus was a normal regular guy?
He was a human being--
>> Oh, I didn't mean that.
>> --who Christed himself?
>> Well, I don't--
I wouldn't say that Jesus
was that normal or regular.
I think Jesus had--
I suspect it may have
gone something like this.
And I don't know.
Nobody else will ever know.
But this is my belief.
>> Well, he was a man.
I should put it that way.
>> Jesus was a human being with
tremendous spiritual passion
and incredible
sincerity and wild,
wild desire to get deeper and
deeper into the truth of his
own nature.
And that incredible
sincerity and that wildness
and that passion took him
on an extraordinary journey
in which he really saw God.
And not only saw
God, but lived what
he saw in the terms of
political, emotional, sexual
engagement with the
world, and through that,
Christed himself, became one
with the power of divine love
in life.
And that is what's so
important about him.
If he just floated in from
some divine dimension,
lived this life, and then
left to that divine dimension,
his life wouldn't
be such a challenge.
If he is just like us, someone
with a tremendous hunger
to know who we really
are, then his life becomes
an overwhelming challenge,
because what it says to us
is that you can Christ yourself.
But you must give everything.
>> One of the ways you say
that we Christ ourselves,
which is a term I think
I like quite a bit.
>> Well it's a term that all
the Christian mystics have used.
>> Yes, very interesting.
>> You've had the official
Christianity and then
you've had mystical
Christianity,
which has often been very secret
and has nothing whatever to do
with the official nonsense.
>> And very controversial.
And resistant.
>> Yes, because it's
Christ's direct experience
and the direct
experience of Christ.
>> Ooh.
>> Yes.
>> So in order for us to
Christ ourselves, and we can,
and that's when we can see God.
Is that what you're saying?
>> Well, I think we see
God, quite honestly,
a long time before we're
actually fully Christed.
You see the spiritual path
goes something like this.
You're called by the divine.
You respond to the call
by prayer and meditation
and adoration.
Slowly, slowly you polish
the mirror of your heart,
and a great light, which
is not of this world,
starts to become visual to you.
You see it.
You see the white light of the
divine shining from things.
But this is not enlightenment,
and it's not full Christing.
It's the beginning
of yet another stage
in which all sorts
of powers are given,
and all kinds of experiences
are given to you.
I'm explaining very
simply what all
the great mystical
traditions know
and what has been
my own experience.
Then, through a
deepening of this,
which takes many years
and tremendous sacrifice
and passion and endless
opening, slowly, slowly you
become one with the light.
Your heart, your
mind, your body all
become slowly integrated in the
power of conscious divine love.
At that moment, the Christing
process starts to begin.
But that is a very high stage,
and it takes a great deal
to get to it.
Not many people will probably
get that highest off stages,
but I think almost everyone
can get very far along the path
if they really want to.
>> What stops us?
What blocks us from
going in that direction?
That's what a lot of people
want is practical advice.
>> This is the most
important thing of all.
Look, we have been told by
the experts, usually men,
by the patriarchal structures,
usually run by men,
by hierarchical elitist
structures all of our lives,
the following, we have
been given a message
that unless we obey them,
and unless we listen to them,
listen to the experts,
take their advice,
obey them, worship them, and
keep them in health, wealth,
and happiness for the
rest of their lives,
we will have not a chance
in heaven of evolving.
So we've given this vision
of ourselves as creepy crawly
worms who cannot
grow unless we obey.
That is entirely the
wrong information.
The real information
is dead simple,
and it's the truth of all
of the mystical traditions.
The real information is this.
You are a child of God.
You have a seed of God
consciousness within you.
That seed can be watered
by prayer, by meditation,
and by serving other human
beings and other sentient
beings with great humility.
If you do that, if you really
pray, if you really meditate,
if you really ask
God to help you,
and if you really
serve others, you
will wake up to your
own human divinity,
and you will be given
all kinds of guidance
directly from the spirit.
You won't need experts.
You won't need gurus.
You won't need priests.
What you will need
is to be yourself
in the core of your life,
turning up to what you
are finding out, and using it.
And that is the great discovery
that the mystic teachers
have tried to give
humanity again and again.
They've come.
When the Buddha came, he gave a
version of that great message.
And you know when he was
dying, they asked him
how can we commemorate
your being here?
And he said to
himself, my god, I've
been talking about how
they are empowered,
and now they want
to celebrate me.
So he took his palm and he put
his palm on top of his palm,
like that, and he said to
commemorate one emptiness
by another, is just to heap
one emptiness on another.
Why don't you
liberate yourselves,
instead of worshipping me?
And they took that shape
and they made out of that
shape the stupa, which is
the sacred shape, which--
So that's what's happened to all
of the great mystic liberators.
They come with this
overwhelming message
that we are all children of God.
Then we worship them,
and create churches
around them, which stops
the real radical glory
of the message ever
getting out to people.
It's terrifying.
>> But we do need teachers.
I mean, you said, we won't need
gurus, but we need teachers.
Don't we?
Aren't you a teacher?
>> Yes, I hope I am.
But what I hope I'm
teaching is how to learn.
I think we need teachers who
know that they are seekers, who
know that they are learners,
who do not want power, who want
the authority not of
power but of love,
and who are there to teach from
their own experience what they
are learning, who don't teach
from a omnipotent omniscient
position, because no one,
no one, including Jesus
and including Rumi and
including Ramakrishnan
would ever, ever claim to
know everything if they'd seen
a glimpse of the glory of God.
It is outrageous.
Those gurus and priests who
claimed to know everything
are simply indulging in a
form of monstrous manipulation
that is absolutely impossible.
Let me tell you a lovely story
of Rumi at the end of his life.
Rumi was the great
King of mystics
who was revered even in his
own time as a great mystic.
>> Brilliant.
>> The most wonderful mystic
perhaps the world has ever
seen.
A young man had heard about
him and was terribly thrilled
and was projecting
endlessly onto Rumi
how glorious he must
be, came all the way
from Constantinople.
He met Rumi walking
outside Konya.
He bowed to Rumi.
Rumi bowed to him.
He bowed again to Rumi.
Rumi about 32 times to the
man until the man got it.
And the man cried
out, oh my god,
why do you treat
me like this, you
who are the King of mystics?
And Rumi said to
him, if I did not
show you my misery
and my nothingness
before God, what use would I be?
So what Rumi is teaching
is the very humility
through which Rumi has learned
everything that he is learning.
That is what we need.
We don't need teachers in
the conventional sense.
We need mirrors of
divine love in which
we can see our own real face.
We need people who can
teach us how to learn.
We need people who have really
been humbled and radically
humbled by direct divine
experience which would totally
stop them being
teachers of any kind
and make them lovers and sharers
and invite us to a great feast.
>> One of the things you spoke
of a little bit earlier was
the importance of
being of service.
How do people mobilize
to begin that?
>> There are five forms of
service and it's very simple
when you get it.
First, you serve the divine
by loving the divine.
And then you serve
the part of you
that is always in
connection with the divine
and that is by praying
and meditating and keeping
that connection alive.
Then you serve the people
in your life, your friends,
your family, your sentient
beings, your pets.
And you serve them,
if you possibly can,
as representatives
of the divine.
And then, you serve
your community,
because you serve your community
by really taking care of what
is going on in your community.
How are the poor
people being treated?
What are the hospitals like?
Are the bus shelters
really helpful?
You look around.
You get informed.
And then of course, you serve
the whole global community
by really staying
in touch, by really
being aware of what is happening
in this environmental horror we
find ourselves in, in what's
happening in global poverty.
All of these forms of
service are different facets
of one diamond of divine love.
And if you really love God and
the world and other people,
it will breed in you
an overwhelming passion
to do good, to do real good,
to make justice happen.
And that will inevitably
express itself
on all of these
different levels,
in all of these
five different ways.
And when you fuse
them together, you
become someone who is
world-centered, god-centered,
and not self-centered.
And that's a very
difficult process.
It's a slow process.
It doesn't come instantly.
But the rewards
are extraordinary,
because then you really are
serving the transformation
that love is trying
to bring about.
>> You know, Mr.
Harvey, you are divine.
>> So are you.
And so is everyone else
watching this program.
We are all divine
children of the divine.
And no one is more
special than anyone else.
Some have seen it.
Others will see it.
It is available.
Claim it.
Live it.
Serve it.
And all things will come
amazingly clear to you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]